- Topics: affine set, affine combination
- Last Update: Feb. 21, 2023

# Prerequisite Knowledge

- The definition of a line and line segment.
- The definition of vector space and subspace.
- The dimension of s space.

## Vector Spaces

A *vector space* $V$ over a filed $\mathbb{F}$ is a set $V$ of objects (called *vectors*) that is *closed* under (Horn,2013)

- *addition* (associative and commutative),
- an *identity* (the *zero vector*, denoted by $0$),
- *scalar multiplication* of the vector by elements. For example, $\forall a,b\in\mathbb{F},\ \forall x,y\in V:a(x+y)=ax+ay,(a+b)x=ax+bx,a(bx)=(ab)x$ and $ex=x$ for the multiplicative identity $e\in\mathbb{F}$.

The real vector space $\mathbb{R}^n$ and the both a real vector space and a complex vector space $\mathbb{C}^n$ are the popular special cases of vector spaces.

## Subspace

A subspace of a vector space $V$ over a field $\mathbb{F}$ is a subset of $V$ that is, by itself, a vector space over $\mathbb{F}$ using the same operations of vector addition and scalar multiplication as in $V$. A subset of $V$ is a subspace precisely when it is closed under these two operations. For example, $\left\{[a,b,0]^T:a,b\in\mathbb{R}\right\}$ is a subspace of $\mathbb{R}^3$ (Horn, 2013). Note that

- The intersection of subspaces is always a subspace.
- A union of subspaces need not be a subspace.

# Definition of Affine Set

For a set $C$ which is a subset of the real number set, i.e. $C\subseteq\mathbb{R}^n$, if the line through any two different points $x_1,x_2\in C$ lies also in $C$, i.e. $\theta x_1+(1-\theta)x_2\in C$ where $\theta\in\mathbb{R}$, the set $C$ is an *affine set*. 

# More General Description of Affine Set

From the definition of affine set, the coeffients of any distinct two point are summed to one. This can be generalized to an arbitrary number of points in an affine set. Consider $k$ distinct points, $x_1,\cdots,x_k\in C$ and the coefficients $\theta_1+\cdots+\theta_k=1$, then the point $\theta_1x_1+\cdots\theta_k x_k$, which is an affine combination of $x_1,\cdots,x_k$, also belongs to $C$.

# Remarks

- The coefficients $\theta_i$ is a real number, can be positive or negative or zero.
- A line must be an affine set, with "minimum" size (which means that no other points away from this line).
- A affine set must be *infinite*, since a line contains a infinite number of points.

# The Dimension of An Affine Set

