- Keywords: Euclidean ball, ball, ellipsoid
- Update: Mar. 6, 2022

---

# Definition of a (Euclidean) ball

One important example of convex set is the *Euclidean ball* and its translation, ellipsoid. A ball is a 3-dimensional extension of a circle in 2 dimension. For most of the people, we know that a disc in $\mathbb{R}^2$ is described in maths as $(x-x_c)^2<r^2,$ where $x_c$ is the center of the disc and $r$ is the radius of the disc. We generalize this concept to name this similar definition as a ball in any $n$ dimension.

**Definition.** A (Euclidean) ball in $\mathbb{R}^n$ is
$$B(x_c,r)=\left\{x\ |\ \|x-x_c\|_2\leq r\right\}=\left\{x\ |\ (x-x_c)^T(x-x_c)\leq r^2\right\},$$

where the *radius* $r>0$, and $\|u\|_2=(u^Tu)^{1/2}$ denotes the Euclidean norm. $x_c$ is the *center* of the ball. Therefore, $B(x_c,r)$ consists of all points within a distance $r$ of the center $x_c$. $\blacksquare$

**Definition.** The Euclidean ball in $\mathbb{R}^n$ can be described as the following form

$$B(x_c,r)=\left\{x_c+ru\ \|\ \|u\|_2\leq r^2\right\},$$

where $x_c$ and $r$ are again respectively the center and the radius of the ball. $\blacksquare$

The second definition may be a bit obscure. $u$ is a vector in any direction whose magnitude is less than or equal to one. $r$ is still the radius determining how large is the ball.

# A ball is a convex set

It is easy to prove the convexity of a ball. If $\|x_1-x_c\|_2\leq r$ and $\|x_2-x_c\|\leq r$, for $0\leq\theta\leq1$, we have

$$\begin{aligned}
   \|\theta x_1+(1-\theta)x_2-x_c\|_2=&\|\theta(x_1-x_c)+(1-\theta)(x_2-x_c)\|_2\\
   \leq&\theta\|x_1-x_c\|_2+(1-\theta)\|x_2-x_c\|_2\\
   \leq&r. 
\end{aligned}$$

# Definition of an ellipsoid

An ellipsoid can be translated by a ball, which is a linear operation.

**Definition**.  An *ellipsoid* in $\mathbb{R}^n$ has the form

$$\mathcal{E}=\left\{x|(x-x_c)^TP^{-1}(x-x_c)\leq1\right\},$$

where $x_c\in\mathbb{R}^n$ is the *center* of the ellipsoid. $P$ is a symmetric and positive definite matrix, i.e. $P=P^T\succ0$, determining how far the ellipsoid extends in every direction from $x_c$. $\blacksquare$

Same as ball, there is another expression for defining an ellipsoid.

**Definition**. An *ellipsoid* can be written as

$$\mathcal{E}=\left\{x_c+Au|\|u\|_2\leq1\right\},$$

where $x_c$ is the center of the ellipsoid, and $A$ is square and nonsingular. Without loss of generality, we can assume that $A$ is symmetric and positive definite. By taking $A=P^{1/2}$, this definition is the same as the first one. $\blacksquare$

Note that $A$ can not be singular, because it defines the length of each axis, and therefore, each eigenvalue should be larger than zero. However, the eigenvalue may be small, indicating that the length of the axis in the corresponding direction is small. If $A$ is symmetric positive semidefinite but singular, the set is called a *degenerate ellipsoid*. Its affine dimension is equal to the rank of $A$.

Ellipsoid as well as degenerate ellipsoid are convex.

# Some remarks of the translation matrix

- $P$ is square, symmetric, positive semidefinite.
- With eigenvalue decomposition, $lambda_i, i=1,2,\cdots,n$ are the eigenvalues of $P$. Without loss of generality, we assume $\lambda_1>\lambda_2>\cdots>\lambda_n$. The corresponding eigenvectors are $v_1,v_2,\cdots,v_n$.
-  $\sqrt{\lambda_i}$ is the length of the semi-axis in direction $v_i$ of the ellipsoid $\mathcal{E}$.
-  If $P=r^2I$, the ellipsoid is a ball, i.e., same length in each axis.