- Keywords: proper cone / 真锥, generalized inequality
- Update: Mar. 03, 2022

---

# Prerequisite knowledge

- cone set
- convex cone

# Definition

**Definition**. A cone $K\subseteq\mathbb{R}^n$ is a *proper cone* if it satisfies the following 4 conditions

- $K$ is *convex*.
- $K$ is *closed*.
- $K$ is *solid* (has nonempty interior).
- $K$ is *pointed* (if $x\in K$, $-x\notin K$).

The proper cone is used to define a *generalized inequality*, which is a partial ordering on $\mathbb{R}^n$.

# What does "partial ordering" mean?

## Ordering in higher dimension leads to ambiguity

If two points $x_1,x_2\in\mathbb{R}$, we can compare them with $>,\geq,<,\leq$, say, $x_1<x_2$. This is called ordinary ordering. Once we go to a higher dimensional space, this ordinary ordering becomes ambiguous. For example, what does mean between two vector $x_1,x_2\in\mathbb{R}^n,n>1$ by $x_1<x_2$? Some may say that this means every element in $x_1$ is smaller than the element in $x_2$ at the corresponding position. Some may argue that this means the norm of $x_1$ is smaller than the norm of $x_2$. Therefore, we need to clearly define how to compare (order) each point in a set, which is referred to this topic *ordering in generalized inequality*.

## With the help of the new concept "proper cone"

Inside a proper cone, we can define an ordering scheme as the ordinary ordering in $\mathbb{R}$

$$x\preceq_K y\Longleftrightarrow y-x\in K.$$

### The set of nonnegative real number is a proper cone

Here we give three examples. If the proper cone is the set of nonnegative real number, i.e. $K=\mathbb{R}_{+}$, the partial ordering $\preceq_K$ is the usual ordering $\leq$ on $\mathbb{R}$.

### The nonnegative orthant is a proper cone

For a higher dimension space, the nonnegative orthant, i.e. $K=\mathbb{R}^n_{+}$ is a proper cone. The generalized inequality $\preceq_K$ corresponds to componentwise inequality between two vectors $x$ and $y$. There is to say,

$$x\preceq_K y\Longleftrightarrow x_i\leq y_i,i=1,2,\cdots,n.$$

Note that many points in $\mathbb{R}^n_{+}$ are not comparable by $\preceq_K$. Only if every element in the vector has same ordering, can they b compared by the generalized inequality. 

### The positive semidefinite cone is a proper cone

The symmetric positive semidefinite (PSD) cone $\mathbb{S}^n_{+}$ is a proper cone in $\mathbb{S}^{n}$. In PSD cone, $X\preceq_K Y$ means $Y-X$ is also PSD. Note that for two different points $X,Y$ where $X\preceq_K Y$ fulfills, $X-Y$ must not be PSD, since the proper cone is pointed.