- Topics: Strong Duality, Slater's Condition
- Last revised: Feb. 12, 2023

---

# Primal and Dual Problems

We consider a convex constrained optimization problem in standard form:

$$\begin{aligned}p^\ast=\min_x\quad&f_0(x)\\s.t.\quad&f_i(x)\le0,\ i=1,\ldots,m,\\&Ax=b\end{aligned}\quad (1)$$

where $f_0,\ldots,f_m : \mathbb{R}^n \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ are *convex* functions, $A\in\mathbb{R}^{p\times n}, b\in\mathbb{R}^p$ define the affine inequality constraints.

To this problem we associate the *Lagrangian*, which is the function $\mathcal{L}:\mathbb{R}^n\times\mathbb{R}^m\times\mathbb{R}^{p}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ with values

$$\mathcal{L}(x,\lambda,\nu) = f_0(x) + \sum_{i=1}^m \lambda_i f_i(x) + \nu^T(Ax-b).$$

The corresponding dual function is the function $g:\mathbb{R}^m\times\mathbb{R}^{p}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ with values

$$g(\lambda,\nu) = \min_x\ f_0(x)+\sum_{i=1}^m\lambda_i f_i(x)+\nu^T(Ax-b).$$

Note that the $\min$ in the above equation is sometimes replaced by $\inf$. Recall that the function $g$ is *concave* in $(\lambda,\nu)$ since it is piecewise infimum, and that it can assume $-\infty$ values. However, if $g(\lambda,\mu)$ is not a meaningful lower bound if it is $-\infty$. Therefore, we consider that its domain is $\textbf{dom }g:=\left\{(\lambda, \nu) ~:~ g(\lambda,\nu) > -\infty \right\}$.

Finally, the dual problem reads

$$d^\ast=\max_{\lambda\ge0,\ \nu}\ g(\lambda,\nu).$$

Note that the sign constraints are imposed only on the dual variables corresponding to inequality constraints. Note also that there are (possibly) implicit constraints in the above problem, since we must have $(\lambda,\nu)$ in $\textbf{dom }g$.

# Strong duality

The theory of weak duality seen here states that $p^\ast\ge d^\ast$. *This is true always, even if the original problem is not convex*. We say that strong duality holds if $p^\ast=d^\ast$.

# Slater's sufficient condition for strong duality (only for convex optimization problem)

In general, strong duality doesn't hold. If the primal problem is convex, i.e. with $f_0,\dots,f_m$ convex in Eq. (1), we *usually (but NOT always)* have strong duality. There are many results developed under the condition that strong duality holds. Therefore, we need to develop conditions to examine if a problem has strong duality or not. These methods are called *constraint qualifications*.

Slater's condition is one of many other constraint qualifications, which relate to the *existence of Lagrangian (multipliers)* in a convex optimization problem. Slater's theorem, named after Morton L. Slater, provides a *sufficient condition* for strong duality to hold. Namely, if

- The primal problem is convex;
- It is strictly feasible, that is, there exists $x_0\in\mathbb{R}^n$ such that

$$Ax_0=b,\quad f_i(x_0)<0,\ i=1,\ldots,m,\quad(2)$$

then, strong duality holds: $p^\ast=d^\ast$, and the dual problem is attained. 

The following is an equivalent expression from Boyd's Book. One simple constraint qualification is Slater's condition: There exists an $x\in\textbf{relint}(\mathcal{D})$ such that Eq. (2) is satisfied. $\textbf{relint}$ represents the relative interior, which is the interior of the set when it is viewed as a subset of the affine space it spans. Note that the *interior* of a set $\mathcal{D}$ is the set of all points interior to $\mathcal{D}$, while *relative interior* is the interior relative to the affine hull of $\mathcal{D}$. Mathematically,

$$\textbf{relint}(\mathcal{D})=\left\{x\in\mathcal{D}:\text{ there exists }\epsilon>0\text{ such that }N_\epsilon(x)\cap\textbf{aff}(\mathcal{D})\subseteq\mathcal{D}\right\},$$

where $\textbf{aff}(\mathcal{D})$ is the affine hull of $\mathcal{D}$, and $N_\epsilon(x)$ is a ball of radius $\epsilon$ centered on $x$.

Note that this condition requires that only at least one point exists. In many cases it is easy to tell whether a problem satisfies the Slater's condition or not.